once around Antares.
So Antares is the 15th brightest star in
the night sky and the lead star of the
constellation of Scorpius, the scorpion,
the one that killed Orion. And there's a
reason that Scorpius and Orion are
opposite each other in the night sky. In
fact, it's all part of the legend of
keeping them eternally apart. So one
from my point of view is a winter
constellation and the other a summer
constellation and in fact Scorpius in
the summer just makes it above the
hedge. It's quite uh low in the sky from
my latitude. So best seen if you're a
bit further south than uh where I am at
52 degrees north here in Cambridge.
So Antares is a very bright star
magnitude just uh 0.6 6 to 1.6 and it
does vary a little bit. This is pretty
common with these type of stars. They
pulsate and their brightness changes.
Mesopotamian astronomers called it the
heart of the scorpion, which makes
sense, the brightest star in the
constellation of Scorpius. And the
Greeks called it Ant Aries, Antares or
Ant Aries, the rival of Mars. And this
is due to its red orange color. It does
look just like Mars looks in the sky
when you observe it with the naked eye.
Now this photograph of of it um is in
fact in false color. It's an infrared
image showing it as white. So uh that's
uh rather a different view of it, but
picking up all of that lovely
nebulosity, all those clouds of gas that
are around it, of which more later. It's
about 550 light years distant from the
sun determined by the usual method of
triangulating using the earth's orbit or
using a satellite like Hippacos shown
there. Gia doesn't have quite the uh
ability to measure these very bright
stars. It's uh overwhelmed by the power
output which um it's really designed for
much fainter objects. So, we're relying
on these other methods at the moment to
estimate this 550 lightyear distance,
but we can get an image of the surface.
This is an actual image rather than a
artist's impression of the surface of
this red super giant star. Temperature
3660 Kelvin and estimated to be about
76,000 times brighter than our sun. And
the image was made by the VT in Chile,
the very large telescope. In fact, by
combining all of them as what's known as
an intererometer to give you the
resolving power based on the distance
between the most extreme um path length
between the separate mirrors rather than
the size of the mirror themselves. a
technique that was first developed here
in Cambridge by Martin Riyle with radio
telescopes and then pioneered again
using the coast telescope here in
Cambridge um in a bunker at the radio
telescope site where they linked se
separate mirrors together brought the
beams of light into an underground lab
um it's uh very James Bond down there I
can tell you and uh that joins the light
together gives you the fantastic IC
resolution to be able to see these
bright and dark features on the surface
of a star 500 light years away. I think
that's amazing.
It's a enormous size. We've got it
compared with some of the other stars
there. Bettle is smaller than Antares.
This comes in somewhere between 600 and
800 times the radius of our sun. It's
quite difficult to define the edge
though. I've heard it said that the
outer layers of these red super giants
are essentially a red hot vacuum and
just thin out almost to nothing as you
go further away. So, it's not possible
really to quite pin down the edge. But
if this was at the center of the solar
system, the inner part of the solar
system would be toast. This would have
swamped all the inner planets right out
and beyond Mars out into the asteroid
belt and it going almost all the way out
to Jupiter's orbit. Absolutely enormous.
We estimate the mass at about 12 times
the mass of the sun and it was probably
15 to 17 when it was born and has been
losing mass ever since. These large
stars tend to have a fairly weak grip on
their outer envelope and uh once they
swell up into these enormous sizes, they
tend to uh soon find that that is lost
and around about 11 to 15 million years
old. So it's somewhere on well between
the 9 m sun and 25 m sun tracks that you
can see on this Herzbrung Russell
diagram of temperature, color versus
mass and luminosity.
And it would will have departed the main
sequence uh several million years ago
now
become a red giant and swollen right up.
And it might be a little bit older. It
might be having another go round. And
you can see that in the uh trajectories
here. These stars leave the main
sequence line, travel horizontally
across the diagram. As they build an
inert core of first helium, and then
when the helium ignites, they go on
what's called a blue loop. They whiz
back left across the diagram, becoming
more efficient. They're now using all
that core mass, carrying out the second
stage of fusion, turning helium into
carbon and oxygen. And then um they
build an inert carbon oxygen core and
lose efficiency again and end up moving
back to the right. So they go through
that loop, the blue loop um passing
through the yellow color in both
directions and end up as an advanced uh
red giant star. And they may do that
several times each time with uh greater
rapidity because the subsequent stages
of nuclear fusion don't last very long.
And we're not quite sure whether Antares
is on its first goound or its second
goaround here, which is why we have um
some variability as to the estimate of
its age. But eventually these stars will
go through all those nuclear fusion
stages. And at 12 solar masses, this is
going to explode. It's above the 10.5
solar mass cutoff. Below that, you will
get some sort of white dwarf star and a
puffing off of the outer layers. But
this is over that. And so within the
next million years or so, it will
explode as a type 2 core collapse
supernova, probably leaving a neutron
star behind. Um, it would have to be 20
to 25 solar masses for it to create a
core large enough to form a black hole.
But when it does blow, it will be as
bright as the full moon and easily seen
in broad daylight. But, uh, that won't
be tomorrow. It's probably got a million
years or so left. Um, as indeed has, uh,
the other red giant bettle.
It has a companion. And there's a lovely
photograph of Antares with its
companion, the B star next to it. First
reported during an occultation when the
moon passed in front of Antares and
blocked out the light from the main
star, revealing this little magnitude
5.5 companion. You'd be able to see that
uh just with the eye uh were it not so
close to the powerhouse of the main A
star. And as you can see from the
history there it was about 1844 46 it
was seen again and then that man William
Rutter Doors Mr. Eagle Eyes himself was
able to measure the separation at 3 and
a half arc seconds back in the year
1847.
Um we actually have his telescope still
on site here. Uh the thorug telescope as
it's known which was I think the one
that was used to do this. Um, and that's
in a dome up on the lawn at the
Institute of Astronomy, and we still use
it. Um, so these two stars are in orbit
around each other, and since uh,
Rotodor's time, the separation between
them has closed somewhat. We think the
orbit is somewhere between 1,200 and
2,500 years in length. Different
estimates have been made of that. And at
that sort of level, you can understand
why in just a couple of hundred years,
it's quite difficult to pin down the
orbital period.
We think that the B star is around seven
solar masses in its own right. So quite
big and with a temperature of 18,500,
which you can tell from the spectrum of
its light. Um but curiously to the eye
although it is a blue white color itself
if you can see Antares in the same field
of view with its highly red color the uh
brain loves to do color correction and
white balance as the photographers would
call it and try and balance the uh
perception of color. So, uh, some people
describe Antares B as a blue green
color, but if you can't see Antares, it
looks blue white. So, it's a trick of
the way that the eye brain works that
creates that. So, fascinating little uh
companion star there.
And the Anturi system is part of the
Scorpius Centurus Association, the
Scosen OB collection.
of bright stars, thousands of stars over
in a very dense region away from the
sun. So we in the sun are in the local
bubble of which is a a region
off to the top right uh sorry top left
of the diagram there and then the lower
right it contains many
uh collections of stars uh the overall
association divided into several groups
there and uh some very deep nebula like
the coals sack and so forth and that
we're looking in towards towards the
center of the galaxy in this direction.
Now these stars are around about that 11
million years old all having been born
together. So it's uh been a very very
active region. And when we look at it we
see one of the most fascinating clouds
of nebula material being lit by the
light of Antares called the row of
cloud. Uh very beautiful indeed in this
astronomical photograph showing uh all
the different uh colors, the reflection
of blue light, the red from lit up uh
emitting uh hydrogen gas and some dark
dust lanes of cold material there as
well. So I'll leave you with a picture
of Antares glowing red in the night sky
there. And I hope you've enjoyed that
trip once around it. Thanks very much
for listening. Bye for now.